---
title: "phepy: Visual Benchmarks and Improvements for Out-of-Distribution Detectors"
collection: publications
category: preprints
permalink: /publication/2023-07-27-phepy
excerpt: 'phepy is a benchmark for out-of-distribution detection, which includes three novel and easily-visualisable toy examples.'
date: 2023-07-27
venue: 'arXiv'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.05815'
citation: '<b>Tyree, J.</b>, Rupp, A., Clusius, P. S., Boy, M. H. (2023) <i>phepy: Visual Benchmarks and Improvements for Out-of-Distribution Detectors</i>. Preprint. Available from: <a href="https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2503.05169">doi:10.48550/arXiv.2503.05169</a>.'
---

## Abstract

Applying machine learning to increasingly high-dimensional problems with sparse or biased training data increases the risk that a model is used on inputs outside its training domain. For such out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs, the model can no longer make valid predictions, and its error is potentially unbounded.

Testing OOD detection methods on real-world datasets is complicated by the ambiguity around which inputs are in-distribution (ID) or OOD. We design a benchmark for OOD detection, which includes three novel and easily-visualisable toy examples. These simple examples provide direct and intuitive insight into whether the detector is able to detect (1) linear and (2) non-linear concepts and (3) identify thin ID subspaces (needles) within high-dimensional spaces (haystacks). We use our benchmark to evaluate the performance of various methods from the literature.

Since tactile examples of OOD inputs may benefit OOD detection, we also review several simple methods to synthesise OOD inputs for supervised training. We introduce two improvements, t-poking and OOD sample weighting, to make supervised detectors more precise at the ID-OOD boundary. This is especially important when conflicts between real ID and synthetic OOD sample blur the decision boundary.

Finally, we provide recommendations for constructing and applying out-of-distribution detectors in machine learning. 
