---
title: "Modelling the impact of anthropogenic aerosols on CCN concentrations over a rural boreal forest environment"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2026-02-06-sosaa-fp-ccn
excerpt: 'We use a novel Lagrangian modelling framework to examine the origins and history of gas and aerosol components observed at the boreal forest measurement site SMEAR II, and their potential to act as CCN.'
date: 2026-02-06
venue: 'Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-26-1967-2026'
citation: 'Clusius, P., Baykara, M., Xavier, C., Zhou, P., <b>Tyree, J.</b>, Foreback, B., Äijälä, M., Graeffe, F., Petäjä, T., Kulmala, M., Paasonen, P., Palmer, P. I., and Boy, M. (2026) Modelling the impact of anthropogenic aerosols on CCN concentrations over a rural boreal forest environment. <i>Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics</i>. 26, 1967–1992. Available from: <a href="https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-26-1967-2026">doi:10.5194/acp-26-1967-2026</a>.'
---

## Abstract

The radiative properties of clouds depend partially on the cloud droplet number concentration, which is determined by the concentration of cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) when the clouds are formed. In turn, CCN concentrations are determined by the atmospheric particle size distribution and their chemical composition. We use a novel Lagrangian modelling framework to examine the origins and history of gas and aerosol components observed at the boreal forest measurement site SMEAR II, and their potential to act as CCN. This framework combines: (a) global emission datasets, (b) backward trajectories from the FLEXible PARTicle dispersion model (FLEXPART) airmass dispersion model, (c) a detailed description of atmospheric chemistry and aerosol dynamics from the Model to Simulate the Concentration of Organic Vapours, Sulphuric Acid and Aerosol Particles (SOSAA). We apply this SOSAA-FP (FP standing for FLEXPART) framework to simulate a period from March to October 2018 with 1h time resolution, focusing on the concentrations of CCN between 0.1% and 1.2% maximum supersaturation as calculated by the κ-Köhler theory (with respective dry particle diameter of activation ca. 175–35nm). We find that the model PM1 fraction of primary particles, sulfates and secondary organic aerosol correlate well with the observed organic aerosol and sulfate trends and explain most of the observed organic aerosol and sulfate PM1 mass. Our results show that primary particle emissions play a considerable role in CCN concentrations even at a rural site such as SMEAR II. Changes in atmospheric cluster formation rates had a relatively weak impact on the CCN concentrations in the sensitivity runs. Enhanced cluster formation increased (decreased) the CCN concentrations for the highest (lowest) maximum supersaturation. Without any cluster formation our modelled median CCN concentrations changed by −48% and +23% for supersaturations of 1.2% and 0.1%, respectively, whereas omitting primary particle emissions had a decreasing effect in all calculated CCN supersaturation classes (−82% and −33% decrease in median CCN of 1.2% and 0.1% supersaturation, respectively). While the enhancing effect of cluster formation to high supersaturation (i.e., small diameter) CCN concentrations is unsurprising, the weak sensitivity to cluster formation rates and the decreasing effect to lowest supersaturation CCN was unexpected, as was the strong influence of anthropogenic primary emissions. The Lagrangian model framework showed its power, as it was possible to trace down the causes behind the unexpected outcomes by comparing how the particle population evolved along the trajectories in different sensitivity tests.
